## 15.1 Summary and reflection

This book engaged in the daunting task of covering a topic that traverses the disparate areas of genetics, biology, statistics, bioinformatics, and social science conceptual thinking. The competences required for researchers to examine the human genome are truly interdisciplinary. Our hope is that we have signaled that a lack of understanding of the human genome and evolution can result in dire errors and misinterpretation. Conversely, those estimating genetic models without consideration of the intricate gene-environment interplay or behavioral aspects can also make grave oversights. We also recognize that leaving our monodisciplinary silos can be taxing. The reader undoubtedly felt stretched when they were required to learn multiple new languages and ways of thinking, from genetics to computing and ways of conceptualizing their phenotype. Due to the introductory nature of this book, we acknowledge that multiple concepts and ideas were introduced fleetingly, inevitably lacking depth at times. Armed with a basic understanding of these topics, however, our intention is that we have made it less daunting and that you now have the basics to enter this field and will know where to practically start to ask questions and seek solutions. 

## 15.2 Future directions

Providing a description of future directions in this field is a formidable and virtually impossible task. Particularly since 2005, genomics has experienced a period of rapid expansion, change, and development. Whereas some research areas inch incrementally along like a steady steam train, genomics is like stepping into a high-speed rail bullet train. Developments are rapid. Even during the process of finalizing this book, new techniques and data emerged on a virtually daily basis. For this reason, here we only sketch some more advanced topics and broad future directions the field might take. 

As we noted in chapter 4, the focus for a large part has been gathering ever larger datasets to isolate more genetic variants and increase the explanation of variance. Moving beyond that, we anticipate that higher-resolution data will undoubtedly emerge in the next years. By this we mean a move from examining individuals to studying cell types (e.g., from single cells). This is, of course, coupled with the drive to move from description and explaining causal associations to understanding biological mechanisms. Deeper biology will also likely explore cis regulatory elements and noncoding RNAs, focusing on functional studies. New technologies and approaches will be able to explain the link between genetic variants and gene expression but also how variants influence protein structure, stability, and interactions. Understanding these mechanisms could, in turn, enhance the clinical and pharmaceutical applications. As with virtually all scientific disciplines, genomics remains subject to questions of replicability and transferability of results. 

As data grows in complexity and size, we likewise anticipate the broad emergence of automated methods, including machine learning and artificial intelligence. The statistics and methods-based approach may be shifting to these broader automated tactics to uncover underlying patterns and principles in the large masses of complex data. Although we anticipate change, we likewise predict stability in the substantive focus on solving diseases and understanding behavior. Here we also foresee continued and growing interest in evolutionary questions that can track which genes have been passed down or are important in complex diseases. Understanding and pinpointing the areas of the genome that have been fundamental to fitness and survival and trade-offs in relation to positive selection and contemporary maladaptation are only a few options. We also expect that there could be a shift beyond single-species genomics (like our book on humans) to multiple species comparisons. 

Chapter 14 raised the ethical issues that will undoubtedly continue to emerge and even grow more important in the next years over data security, sharing, and ownership. As the chapter illustrated, genomic data has challenged classic notions about informed consent, data protection, regulation of new technologies, and identification. Blockchain technologies are often mentioned as technologies that may play a role to address at least some of these technical and security factors. Regulations are often built on data protection based on the premise that data are held and managed by universities or the government, yet data are increasingly retained by large commercial companies that often have a profit or pharmaceutical interest. Genomic data is furthermore highly identifying, not only for the individual but also and inadvertently to their family. Here antidiscrimination laws, personal freedom, and data protection needs to be evaluated and openly discussed. This is intertwined with an individual's understanding of his or her own genetic information but also basic human rights about self-knowledge and treatment. On another front, precision medicine via genetics is also envisioned as important for employers and government, raising multiple issues and concerns that would need to be communicated carefully to the public. Individual understanding, perceptions, trust, and fear of data usage requires a behavioral understanding—not a technical solution. 

Perhaps one of the largest gains (we hope) will be that the lack of ancestral diversity will be gradually ameliorated. With this there also needs to be a shift in the reliance on universal genome reference panels, which impairs our understanding of the likely true genetic diversity of the human species. Other promising techniques that have already emerged are the microbiome, epigenetics, and CRISPR/Cas9-based methods (i.e., gene editing), and single-cell RNA sequencing, which are expansive topics we cannot do justice to here. 

One topic that we wish that we could have delved into, but that went beyond the scope of this textbook, is epigenetics. Epigenetics is a way in which to study the dynamic nature of the genome or, simply put, it examines the biological mechanisms that switch genes on and off. One way to think of it is that DNA is the hardware and epigenetics is the software. Recall from our discussion in chapter 1 about the central dogma of molecular biology, that DNA provides the instructions for functional proteins to be produced inside cells. Epigenetics impacts how genes are read by cells and whether these cells produce relevant proteins. Although certain genes may be present in various types of cells, it may only be expressed in certain types of cells. Epigenetics is also very pervasive because what you eat or how you exercise or sleep could cause chemical modifications around genes that turn genes on or off. Since it is so multifaceted and dynamic it has been difficult to analyze, and at the time of writing this book, still somewhat in its infancy. There are also many analytical challenges. Batch and cell distribution confounds need to be discerned for each analysis, and results are often tissue specific. A fascinating example is this area is Hovarth and Raj's epigenetic clock [1] extended by Hovarth [2]. In this model, DNA methylation levels are used to predict age across a broad array of human tissues and cell types. This is a fascinating area of research that we anticipate will lead to breakthroughs in developmental biology, cancer, aging and longevity research. 

The focus in genetics has been in many cases almost exclusively on increasing the quality and precision of genetic data. Relatively less attention has been placed on improving the definition of phenotypes. We are limited by what we can actually measure. A 2012 review found that phenotypes or the traits that are studied in genetics are often “sloppy and imprecise” [3]. A growing area of interest is in the area of deep phenotyping, particularly in the area of precision medicine. Deep phenotyping refers to a more comprehensive analysis of the phenotype by providing more specificity, linkage of new types of data and measurements, and new connections between trait subtypes and genetic variations. It is phenotyping in a much more fine-grained and multifaceted way, often using advanced algorithms and data linkage. A recent study, for example, used machine learning models and electronic health records to generate better patient survival and mortality in coronary artery disease [4]. Although the future is hard to predict, what we can say is that it will be full of discovery—and many surprises—along the way. 

## References



1. S. Hovarth and K. Raj, DNA methylation-based biomarkers and the epigenetic clock theory of ageing. Nat. Rev. Gen. 19, 371–384 (2018). 





2. S. Hovarth, DNA methylation age of human tissues and cell types. Gen. Bio. 14, R115 (2013). See also erratum, Gen. Bio. 16, 96 (2015). 





3. P. N. Robinson, Deep phenotyping for precision medicine. Hum. Mutat. 33, 777–780 (2012). 





4. A. J. Steele et al., Machine learning models in electronic health records can outperform conventional survival models for predicting patient mortality in coronary artery disease. PLoS One 13, e0202344 (2018).